### LASM 3.2.X.X - LASM IR
> Latest update: 2024-8-15, by urays@foxmail.com

#### 1 What is LASM IR?

LASM IR is an assembly-level intermediate representation specifically designed to describe performance-critical programs on the VLIW architecture.

- **Plain-Text Representation**. LASM IR has **powerful** hardware manipulation and is more **concise** and **usable** than VLIW assembly. It provides the programmer with a set of assembly-like syntax rules and concise pseudo-operations for describing programs. With multiple file references, function calls and return mechanisms, the implementation of any complex program can be disassembled into the form of multiple functions. Using LASM IR, the VLIW programmer no longer needs to be concerned with instruction parallelism, functional unit allocation, instruction latency, and register allocation, but only with instruction semantics and the functional design of the program. Programmers also do not need to declare variables additionally (use-as-declaration) and are **free** to specify physical registers, functional units, and inter-instruction parallelism.
- **In-Memory Representation**. Programs written in LASM IR are eventually parsed into a single, persistent memory structure called LACTX, which is active throughout the LASM optimization pipeline. Importantly, before LACTX is fed into the LASM scheduling framework, it undergoes a code refinement step. The purpose of the code refinement is to eliminate the negative effects of user-ignored programming behaviors that hinder subsequent optimizations. The refinement techniques in LASM focus on eliminating useless operations and simplifying program structure, mainly including inline function expansion, inter-procedural optimization, context-aware call-point movement (to reduce runtime stack traffic), dead code elimination (DCE), and loop invariant code motion (LICM).

#### 2 Symbol Types

1. **Predefined Symbol** involves machine mnemonics defined by the user-edited machine description file, representing instructions, registers, and functional units, as well as system-defined symbols, including pseudo-operations, 23 types of operators, and a parallel symbol (i.e., '|'). 
Pseudo-operations are marked by the character '@' and pertain to segment (@sect,@usect), data storage type (@bN,@bh,@bf,@bd), function (@func, @main, @ret, label:) and inter-function (@import,@call,@icall) and utilities (@asg,@dreg,@align,@mdep,@icp,@bar). @import also helps users to compile specific functions from large kernel libraries. (See [markdown](lasm-ir-pseudo-operation.md)))
2. **Address Indicator** is a class of symbols used to mark program addresses that are mapped to real physical addresses after symbol relocation. It consists of three types: memory first address (defined by @sect or @usect), function name (defined by @func or @main), and in-function label (label: ).
3. **Constant** is categorized as ordinary or symbolic. Ordinary constants include basic constants, strings, and constant expressions. Symbolic constants are symbols defined by datatype pseudo-operations (@bN, @bh, @bf, @bd) to represent ordinary constants or address indicator's properties. To be noted, only decimal integer constants have a numeric meaning, while other integer constants are treated as 128-bit complements. Half-precision, single-precision, and double-precision constants adhere to the IEEE754 standard in machine code. (See [markdown](lasm-ir-constant.md))
4. **Variable** is a class of symbols used to represent a piece of data that can be mapped to memory. Variables are categorized as single variables (e.g., old), pairs of variables (e.g., old:even), and variable expressions (e.g., (old+even) >>1. Each variable expression is ultimately translated into a set of instructions.
5. **Substitution Symbol** (defined by @asg) is a class of symbols used to represent other symbols. One of its uses is to specify physical registers for single variables or pairs of variables in a program.


#### 3. A simple LASM IR program
$$Y\leftarrow \alpha\times X + \beta\times Y$$

```
@sect ".text"
@func _axpby X, Y, N, alpha, beta {
    mov        X, ar0
    mov        Y, ar1
    mov        Y, ar2
    and        0x1F, N, c
    shflr      5, N, i
[c] add        1, i, i
LOOP:
    vload      *ar1++[16], y16_1:y16_0
    VLDDW      *ar0++[16], x16_1:x16_0
    bcast      alpha, v_alpha						
    bcast      beta, v_beta	
    vmul       x16_1, v_alpha, x16_1_r           ;x*alpha
    vmul       x16_0, v_alpha, x16_0_r
    vmuladd    y16_1, v_beta, x16_1_r, x16_1_r   ;alpha*X + beta*Y
    vmuladd    y16_0, v_beta, x16_0_r, x16_0_r
    vstor      x16_1_r:x16_0_r, *ar2++[16]
[i] sub        1, i, i
[i] br	       LOOP
    @ret
}
```

```
;A test script for the _axpby
;The following code is automatically generated by the LASM test suite.
@import ".\MT3000-GPDSP\lib\csl.la", test_output, test_stop, config_cvccr, config_scr
@import ".\program\_axpby.la", _axpby
@sect ".text"
@main testing__axpby {
    @b36 addrX, 0X210000000
    @b36 addrY, 0X210060000
    @b64 N, 32768
    @b64 alpha, 0X404c000000000000
    @b64 beta, 0Xc040000000000000
    @icall config_cvccr, 3
    @icall config_scr, 3
    @bar
    @icall _axpby, addrX, addrY, N, alpha, beta ;call the target kernel.
    @bar
END:
    @icall test_output, addrY, N*8
    @icall test_stop
}
```